Update docs after Python runtime changes (#7053)
dagger/dagger: docs/current_docs/manuals/developer/python/820256-module-structure.mdx

title: "Module Structure"
---

# Module Structure

It's essential to understand a few key concepts about Dagger Modules created for use with the Python SDK, for a better fit with your normal development workflow.

## Python version

> Dagger Modules run in a [container](../overview/942201-execution-environment.mdx) that's bootstrapped specifically by the Python SDK, with the necessary environment to run the module's code. It currently runs Python 3.11 by default but starting with [v0.11.0][v11] that can be changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dagger Modules run in a [container](../overview/942201-execution-environment.mdx) that's bootstrapped specifically by the Python SDK, with the necessary environment to run the module's code. It currently runs Python 3.11 by default but, starting with [Dagger v0.11.0][v11], the version can be changed.
```

The desired interpreter version can be pinned by creating a `.python-version` file next to your `pyproject.toml`:

> ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```console
```

echo "3.11" > .python-version
```

> This can be useful either to pin the version in case the default one gets an upgrade, or to choose another a newer version sooner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be useful either to pin the version in case the default one gets an upgrade, or to choose a newer version.
```

> As an alternative, setting [requires-python](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/#python-requires) in `pyproject.toml` will also pin the version, but using a lower bound constraint (minimum version). For example, the following will use 3.11, even though there's a 3.12 available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an alternative, setting [`requires-python`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/#python-requires) in `pyproject.toml` will also pin the version, but using a lower bound constraint (minimum version). For example, the following will use Python v3.11, even though there's a v3.12 available:
```

```toml
[project]
requires-python = ">=3.11"
```

## Base image

> The default base image is [python:VERSION-slim](https://hub.docker.com/_/python/tags?name=3.11-slim) (based on the [Python version](#python-version)), but it can be overridden in `pyproject.toml` since [v0.11][v11]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default base image is [python:VERSION-slim](https://hub.docker.com/_/python/tags?name=3.11-slim) (based on the [Python version](#python-version)), but it can be overridden in `pyproject.toml` since [Dagger v0.11][v11]:
```

```toml
[dagger.tool]
base-image = "acme/python:3.11"
```

> This can be useful to add a few requirements to the module's execution environment, like operating system packages such as `git` for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be useful to add a few requirements to the module's execution environment, such as system packages like `git`.
```

:::warning
Don't deviate from the default base image too much or it may break in a future version of Dagger. Override at own risk.
:::

## Automatic SDK install

> Each release of Dagger bundles the Python SDK inside the Engine container image. During the Dagger Module's code generation phase, that directory is unpacked and installed automatically, including dependencies. That's the copy that is exported to the host on `dagger init --sdk=python` or `dagger develop --sdk=python`. It's **not** the same as installing from [dagger-io](https://pypi.org/project/dagger-io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each release of Dagger bundles the Python SDK inside the Engine container image. During the Dagger module's code generation phase, that directory is unpacked and installed automatically, including dependencies. It is exported to the host on `dagger init --sdk=python` or `dagger develop --sdk=python`. Note that this is **not** the same as installing from [dagger-io](https://pypi.org/project/dagger-io/).
```

Author: The "It is exported to the host" part doesn't seem quite right. I intended to point out or identify that the `./sdk` directory that people see after init comes from this directory that's bundled inside the engine container, and does not come from what's published in PyPI (dagger-io).

Reviewer: Updated, see if this is clearer?

The runtime container installs the SDK as an editable install, similar to the following:

```shell
# executed by the runtime container
uv pip install -e ./sdk
```

This is why the initial `pyproject.toml` file doesn't include any [dependencies](./077133-python-dependencies.mdx).

### UV installer

> [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is used internally to create the virtual environment, install dependencies and create the [lock file](./077133-python-dependencies.mdx#lock-file) (starting with [v0.11.0][v11]). It's possible to specify a newer version if needed, in `pyproject.toml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is used internally to create the virtual environment, install dependencies and create the [lock file](./077133-python-dependencies.mdx#lock-file) (starting with [Dagger v0.11.0][v11]). It's possible to specify a newer version, if needed, in `pyproject.toml`:
```

```toml
[tool.poetry]
name = "awesome-module"
packages = [{ include = "main", from = "src" }]
```

## Default project layout

> The default template from `dagger init` creates a `main` package inside a `src` directory. This follows a [Python convention](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/src-layout-vs-flat-layout/) that requires a project to be installed in order to run its code, which prevents accidental usage of development code since the Python interpreter includes the current working directory as the first item on the import path (more information is available in this [blog post on Python packaging](https://blog.ionelmc.ro/2014/05/25/python-packaging/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default template from `dagger init` creates a `main` package inside a `src` directory. This follows a [Python convention](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/src-layout-vs-flat-layout/) that requires a project to be installed in order to run its code. This prevents accidental usage of development code since the Python interpreter includes the current working directory as the first item on the import path (more information is available in this [blog post on Python packaging](https://blog.ionelmc.ro/2014/05/25/python-packaging/)).
```

│  ├── lint.py
│  └── test.py
├── dagger.json
├── pyproject.toml
└── requirements.lock
```

In this case, it is necessary to explicitly tell Poetry where to find the package, as shown below (truncated for brevity):

```toml
[tool.poetry]
name = "awesome-module"
packages = [{ include = "main" }]
```

## Alternative project template

If a different project layout is needed, `dagger init` won't override existing `pyproject.toml` and `.py` files. For example, to create the initial files with [Rye](https://rye-up.com):

```console
rye init --name=main acme
cd acme
dagger init --sdk=python --source=.
```

> Rye will create an initial `src/main/__init__.py` but Dagger won't recognize any Dagger Functions in it. Either remove it and let Dagger create the default one, or adapt to own's needs before running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rye will create an initial `src/main/__init__.py` but Dagger won't recognize any Dagger Functions in it. Either remove it and let Dagger create the default one, or adapt it to your needs before running `dagger call`.
```

> ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> dagger call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
